# HA-WEBTRACK Project

## Overview and Components

The HA-WEBTRACK project aims to create a high-availability web server environment, leveraging a suite of open-source tools for robust, scalable web hosting and comprehensive system monitoring. This setup is designed to ensure maximum uptime and performance through automated deployment and configuration processes using Ansible. All configurations are enforced with SELinux set to enforcing mode to enhance security and comply with strict access controls.

### Key Components

- **VirtualBox**: Provides a secure and isolated virtual environment for all servers—Control Node, HAProxy, and Web Servers—facilitating easy management and scalability.

- **Red Hat Enterprise Linux (RHEL) VMs**: These virtual machines serve as the operating platform for all nodes, providing a stable and secure foundation for web services and load balancing functionalities. SELinux policies are enforced to ensure that all operations are secure and compliant with the necessary security standards.

- **Ansible**: Central to the automation of provisioning, configuring, and managing the server infrastructure, ensuring consistency and efficiency in deployments. Ansible is used to manage SELinux settings effectively across all nodes.

- **HAProxy**: This load balancer efficiently distributes incoming network traffic across two web servers, enhancing the reliability and availability of web services.

- **Apache HTTPD**: The web server software running on Node2 and Node3, tasked with serving web content reliably and efficiently.

- **Prometheus**: A powerful monitoring tool that collects metrics from various components of the infrastructure, essential for proactive management and troubleshooting.

- **Grafana**: Works in conjunction with Prometheus for visualizing real-time metrics through intuitive dashboards, enhancing monitoring capabilities and insights.

- **Loki**: Integrates with Grafana to provide a powerful log aggregation system, allowing for effective searching and analysis of logs directly from the monitoring dashboard.

- **Promtail**: Responsible for gathering logs and shipping them to Loki, crucial for centralized log management and analysis.

- **Node Exporter**: Collects hardware and OS metrics exposed by *NIX kernels, which are then made available to Prometheus for monitoring system performance.

- **Alertmanager**: Manages and routes alerts generated by Prometheus to various channels, including Slack. This integration ensures that team members receive immediate notifications for critical incidents and system alerts, facilitating quick responses and effective incident management.

- **GitHub**: Acts as the repository for all project code, enabling version control, collaborative development, and historical tracking of the project, facilitating easy updates and team collaboration.

This consolidated approach not only highlights each critical component but also underscores their integrated roles in maintaining a high-performance, highly available web server environment, with a strong emphasis on security through SELinux enforcement and real-time communication through Slack for alert management.

## Getting Started

### Prerequisites
Before you begin, ensure you have the following prepared:
- **Four Red Hat RHEL 9 VMs**: These will act as your control node, load balancer (HAProxy), and two web servers.
- **Network Configuration**: Set IP addresses and hostnames for each VM using tools like `nmtui` to ensure proper networking. Ensure that the networking mode is set to `Bridge Adapter` to allow the VMs to directly communicate with the network as independent devices.

### Server Specifications
Below is a table outlining the specifications for each server used in the project:

| Server        | Role            | CPU | RAM  | Additional Notes                    |
|---------------|-----------------|-----|------|-------------------------------------|
| Control Node  | Management      | 2   | 4 GB | Second disk provisioned (min 20 GB) |
| Node1 (HAProxy) | Load Balancer | 2   | 4 GB |                                     |
| Node2 (WebServer) | Web Server  | 1   | 1 GB |                                     |
| Node3 (WebServer) | Web Server  | 1   | 1 GB |                                     |

> **Note:** Ensure each server meets or exceeds the specifications listed to ensure optimal performance and reliability of the HA-WEBTRACK environment.

### Setup Environment
- **Insert the RHEL ISO on control node** <br><br>
- **Run the command to mount the ISO:** <br><br>
  ```bash
  sudo mount /dev/sr0 /mnt
  ```
- **Add and configure the repository from the ISO:** <br><br>
  ```bash
  dnf config-manager --add-repo=file:///mnt/AppStream
  dnf config-manager --add-repo=file:///mnt/BaseOS
  echo "gpgcheck=0" >> /etc/yum.repos.d/mnt_AppStream.repo
  echo "gpgcheck=0" >> /etc/yum.repos.d/mnt_BaseOS.repo
  ```
- **Install `git` and `ansible-core`:** <br><br>
  ```bash
  dnf install -y git ansible-core
  ```
- **Create `ansible` user on `control node` and set password:** <br><br>
  ```bash
  useradd ansible
  passwd ansible # Follow prompts to set password
  ```
- **Add the `ansible` user to the `sudoers` file to grant necessary privileges:** <br><br>
  ```bash
  sudo echo 'ansible ALL=(ALL) NOPASSWD:ALL' > /etc/sudoers.d/ansible
  ```
- **Switch to the ansible user and set up an SSH key pair:** <br><br>
  ```bash
  su - ansible
  ssh-keygen # Press enter (3x) to accept the default file location and no passphrase
  ```

### Installation
To install and set up the project, follow these steps:

1. **Clone the repository:** <br><br>
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/Thuynh808/HA-WebTrack
   cd HA-WebTrack
   ```
2. **Install required Ansible collections:** <br><br>
   ```bash
   ansible-galaxy collection install -r requirements.yaml
   ```
3. **Confirm Mount the RHEL ISO:** <br><br>
   ```bash
   sudo mount /dev/sr0 /mnt
   ```
4. **Configure inventory `ansible_host`:** <br><br>
   ```bash
   vim inventory
   ```
> **Note:** Make sure to change IP addresses for all 4 servers according to your setup
5. **Run the initial setup script:** <br><br>
   ```bash
   ./initial-setup.sh
   ```
   **This script prepares our ansible environment by setting up necessary ansible user, host configurations, ssh-keys and repositories.** <br><br>
   *ansible user password: 'password'*

> **Note:** before installing components, add your slack webhook url for alertmanager to send alerts
6. **Edit alertmanager config file:** <br><br>
   ```bash
   vim roles/alertmanager/templates/alertmanager_config.j2
   ```
7. **Execute the main Ansible playbook:** <br><br>
   ```bash
   ansible-playbook site.yaml -vv
   ```
   **This command starts the configuration of all components as defined in the playbook. The -vv option increases verbosity, which can help with troubleshooting if needed.**

### Verification
After installation, verify that all components are running correctly by accessing the following URLs and ensuring that each service is operational:

### Services and URLs

  | Server | Service Name | URL |
  |--------|--------------|-----|
  | Control Node | Grafana | &lt;controlnode_ip&gt;:3000 |
  | Control Node | Prometheus | &lt;controlnode_ip&gt;:9090 |
  | Control Node | Loki(through Grafana) | &lt;controlnode_ip&gt;:3000 |
  | Control Node | Alertmanager | &lt;controlnode_ip&gt;:9093 |
  | HAProxy (node1.streetrack.org) | HAProxy | &lt;node1_ip&gt;:80 |
  | HAProxy (node1.streetrack.org) | Node Exporter | &lt;node1_ip&gt;:9100 |
  | HAProxy (node1.streetrack.org) | HAProxy Exports | &lt;node1_ip&gt;:8405/metrics |
  | HAProxy (node1.streetrack.org) | Promtail | &lt;node1_ip&gt;:9080 |
  | Web Server 1 (node2.streetrack.org) | Web Server | &lt;node2_ip&gt;:80 |
  | Web Server 1 (node2.streetrack.org) | Node Exporter | &lt;node2_ip&gt;:9100 |
  | Web Server 1 (node2.streetrack.org) | Promtail | &lt;node2_ip&gt;:9080 |
  | Web Server 2 (node3.streetrack.org) | Web Server | &lt;node3_ip&gt;:80 |
  | Web Server 2 (node3.streetrack.org) | Node Exporter | &lt;node3_ip&gt;:9100 |
  | Web Server 2 (node3.streetrack.org) | Promtail | &lt;node3_ip&gt;:9080 |


### Troubleshooting
If you encounter issues during the Ansible playbook execution, check the Ansible logs for detailed error messages.
Ensure all prerequisites are correctly installed and configured before starting the installation.
For issues related to specific components, refer to the component's documentation or the troubleshooting section of this guide.
